Hi, I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations," coming
to you from our
beautiful studios
here in Los Angeles, California.
Did you know that 55
million people a day
deal with the loss of a
loved one and, on average,
people can suffer over six
to eight years over grief?
Would it help you if you knew
that although grieving is
inevitable, there's a
handbook, so to speak,
for dealing with
grief in 30 minutes?
So when that debilitating
grief surfaces,
there is actually a
step-by-step process
that can help you
handle the next moment
with a little bit more peace.
Even if you're grieving
the loss of a job
or a divorce or
any other loss, it
helps if you have a grief
coach-- or better yet, you
become your own grief coach.
And joining me is Aurora Winter,
whose firsthand experience
with grief taught her how
to help others find a sense
of peace within the loss.
Thank you so much
for being here.
Great to be here
with you, Lisa.
LISA GARR: You're so brave,
and you're such an inspiration
to so many people.
Thank you.
LISA GARR: So tell me
about your experience
when you suddenly had to handle
an enormous amount of grief.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, well,
my story is that, you know,
I thought my life was perfect.
And it was just on the cusp
of getting even better.
My husband and I had
launched a multimillion
dollar business from scratch.
LISA GARR: Oh my goodness.
We had a beautiful
four-year-old son,
who was adorable as only
four-year-olds can be.
We were building our
dream home on the lake.
I'd just met Mel
Gibson and Goldie Hawn
and John Badham, who
directed "Stakeout."
And so I'm, like, yeah.
I'm being paved and hired to--
LISA GARR: Oh my gosh.
---to write a screenplay.
So I thought, yeah,
everything's perfect
and just about to get better.
And then my 33-year-old
husband died suddenly.
And he died, you
know, right beside me.
And--
LISA GARR: Oh.
It was devastating.
I felt like my entire
life shattered.
I felt like Humpty Dumpty,
you know, smashed to pieces.
And I had no idea how to put
the pieces back together again.
LISA GARR: When you
were on such a high
and then this-- out
of the blue-- I mean,
sometimes when you're
on that kind of a role,
you think, oh, nothing bad is
going to happen to me, right?
I'm super-person, right?
That's how I felt. I felt
like I was in a golden glow.
And I tried everything
to get better, you know.
I worked out as if I was
training for the Olympics.
I read every self-help book
I could get my hands on.
You know, I did therapy.
I went to church, but
nothing really helped
until I put together a recipe.
First, I stumbled
across it for myself--
put it into use in my own life.
And now, that just
changed everything.
I'm happy.
I'm peaceful and effective.
LISA GARR: Well, I mean, let
me take you back to that moment
when you were dealing with that.
Because you had--
I mean, were you
dealing more with your own
grief or the grief of your son
that he was-- that your son
was going through or both?
I mean, did you have
time to grieve yourself?
You know, it's almost
like asking, like,
did you have time to
deal with the tidal wave?
No, you don't have-- you
know, but you have no choice.
I-- it was so intense for me.
It was so unexpected.
And I was so in love
with my husband.
I felt like I was just hit
with a tidal wave of emotions.
And it was so raw.
I felt like I was
raped emotionally.
It was horrific
and heartwrenching.
And of course, I wanted
to be there for my son.
But I was not at my best--
LISA GARR: Right.
---to say the least, yeah.
LISA GARR: And the questions
that he was asking-- I
mean, when I read your book,
"From Heartbreak to Happiness,"
I read it in one night.
And I was in tears the entire
time because of-- oh, you
write-- first of all
the journaling process
that you did that helped you
get through these moments--
these step-by-step moments.
How did you get yourself
to be able to even write?
Some days, it was
just one sentence.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
LISA GARR: Well, I've written
a diary since I was nine,
so it wasn't a new
thing that I took on.
It was a habit.
And thank God, I had
that because that
was really my lifeline.
Because if-- if you can't
feel it, you can't heal it,
I've since learned.
LISA GARR: Wow.
And journaling actually
is a simple thing
people can do that
will really help them
discover their own
wisdom and exorcise
those demons, so to speak.
But yeah, as you
read in my book,
one of the toughest
moments was telling my son
because he was only four.
And he kept asking, you know,
when is Daddy coming home?
You know, aren't
the doctors going
to make Daddy's heart better?
And I just couldn't spit
out the word dead at first.
LISA GARR: Not that
he would comprehend.
No, not that a
four-year-old understands--
LISA GARR: Yeah.
---dead.
So I told him again and again
Daddy's not coming home.
And I think that day-- you know,
the 24 hours after my husband
died-- that actually the
death was horrific but telling
my beautiful four-year-old,
with so much hope in his eyes,
that Daddy wasn't
coming home, that was
like, ugh-- knife in my heart.
LISA GARR: So how did
you go through even
healing that process-- and
take him along with you?
AURORA WINTER: It was a journey.
LISA GARR: Yes, it
didn't happen overnight.
AURORA WINTER: It
LISA GARR: And that's
important, right there,
for people to understand.
It is a process.
AURORA WINTER: It is a process.
Healing is a process.
Dr. Edward [INAUDIBLE] has
done extensive research.
And as you said in the
opening, people can typically
suffer five to eight years.
And my life's work now is
to change that because I
think it takes five to
eight years because we
don't know any better.
It's not people's fault.
They don't have a recipe.
They don't have a system,
and they just wait.
But just as if you
had a broken arm,
it doesn't make sense
with a broken arm
to ask, well, how
long should I wait
before going to see the doctor?
But people ask that
with a broken heart--
like, how long should I
wait before doing anything?
Don't wait!
Do something now.
LISA GARR: Don't,
like- do what though?
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, OK.
LISA GARR: I mean,
grieving groups,
processes, things like that?
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, well,
you know, I have a process.
And we're going to go
into that in depth.
And I'd love to share that
because it's something
people can immediately do.
LISA GARR: There
was a moment that I
read about that
you had that was--
it was a dream, wasn't it?
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
A moment of acceptance, which--
how long after your husband
passed did you have
that-- that dream?
AURORA WINTER: I had
a life-changing dream
on the second
anniversary of his death.
And up until that moment,
I still felt like a victim.
I felt like I shouldn't
be a single mom.
I shouldn't, you
know, be a widow-- uh,
horrible word to even get out.
And our son shouldn't
be without his father.
And so my late husband
came to me in this dream,
and he asked me three questions,
and they changed my life.
The first question was, if you
had it to do all over again,
would you still marry me?
LISA GARR: Oh.
I thought about
all the good times,
I'm, like, I'd still marry you.
The second question was--
LISA GARR: That's
powerful right there.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: I'm
fighting back tears.
AURORA WINTER: I can see that.
LISA GARR: But I
mean, for you to even
get to that point of would you
go through this all over again?
And that you loved him that
much that you would go through
that all over again is huge.
Yeah.
That's beautiful.
And, OK, you got me.
And it was wonderful to get
those questions in the dream.
The second question was, if you
had it to do all over again,
would you still have our son?
LISA GARR: Oh.
And it was, like, of course,
he's the light of my life.
He's my joy-- my blessing.
I wouldn't trade
him for anything.
LISA GARR: No.
And the third question
really changed my life
because he said, well,
given those two answers,
would you want to know
that I would die young?
And I searched my heart in the
dream for a very long moment.
And I discovered
the answer was no.
I would not want
to taint the joy
that we did have with dread.
LISA GARR: That makes sense.
I mean, every moment
you would be--
AURORA WINTER: Dreading it.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
Hm mm.
AURORA WINTER: And that
changed everything.
And it allowed
that victim energy
to just evaporate and be
replaced with gratitude
for the time that we did have.
And for those first
two years, you know,
grief is not one emotion.
It's a cacophony of emotions.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
And you read in my book,
"From Heartbreak to Happiness."
LISA GARR: Yes.
But I did in general have a
lot of victim energy around it.
But after that dream, that
sense of being a victim
permanently evaporated.
LISA GARR: Well, I want
to expand on those two
years for a second because you
do an amazing job of putting
words to those feelings
that people are having about
their joy being taken away--
about the victimization of it
shouldn't be this way--
of are they in pain--
all of that, any kind of loss.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: As I
mentioned earlier,
it could be the loss of a job.
It could be explaining the
loss of a pet to a little one.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: Yeah, all right, so--
AURORA WINTER: Well, I really
define grief as the loss
of hopes and dreams.
So it doesn't have to be death.
You know, a divorce
has got grief--
LISA GARR: Yes.
---because of the loss
of hopes and dreams.
LISA GARR: Yes.
If you lose or change
careers, there can be grief.
Financial loss grief--
having a special needs child
with autism, I also define
that as the loss of hopes
and dreams, so there's grief.
LISA GARR: Interesting.
So yeah, I define grief very,
very broadly because it's
not what happens exactly.
It's what did you
expect to happen?
What were your hopes and dreams?
And then, if you just
allow your dreams
to be stillborn without honoring
that and processing that
somehow, it's going
to weigh on you--
whereas if you acknowledge
that, then you can grieve it.
And then there opens
a space for new dreams
and new possibilities.
But coming back
to your question--
or did you want
to say something?
LISA GARR: Yeah,
well, it was actually
that-- what you just said about
having a child with autism.
And I heard somebody
from your-- that
had been through your
workshops and your process
explain that was her experience
of when she found out
her child had autism,
that she really
felt like she was robbed from
having a normal child, right?
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: That experience.
She had a life-changing
"aha" at one of my Grief
Coach Academy workshops.
And she went from thinking
that her special needs daughter
was driving her
insane to realizing
that she was driving her sane.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
And that was really calling
her forth into her greatness,
into being grounded,
into being peaceful,
into being the best
human being and mother
she could possibly be.
And she's shifted from
feeling like this shouldn't be
happening to me, like--
to feeling like gratitude
and it changed her life.
So in a moment,
[SNAPS]
---we can change our thinking.
And it's our thinking that
keeps us stuck in grief.
LISA GARR: Do you think we have
to go through a two-year period
before we get there?
AURORA WINTER: No!
LISA GARR: No?
AURORA WINTER: No.
LISA GARR: I mean, 30
minutes, Aurora-- really?
AURORA WINTER: Really.
-Really.
And here's-- when
I coach people,
they can sometimes have
a meaningful but welcome
shift in 30 minutes.
But sometimes they have
a life-changing shift
in 30 minutes or less.
And just like you
can get totally clean
and have a luxurious
shower in 30 minutes,
it doesn't mean that
you only do it once.
LISA GARR: And you're not
going to get dirty again.
AURORA WINTER: Right.
LISA GARR: Exactly.
AURORA WINTER: So
the same with grief.
If you're really in
the midst of something,
do the peace method
every day for 30 minutes
until you get peaceful--
until you feel grounded.
It's something you
can do at home.
You can do it as a
journaling process.
But if you're really in
the depths of despair,
it's going to work
better if you come
to a workshop or work with
a certified grief coach,
obviously.
But 30 minutes a day
will change your life.
LISA GARR: That's great.
And we're going to be teaching
that in just a little bit.
But so if somebody
would start off though
after they're fresh after
having somebody leave
their lives that they love
or a situation or a job,
would you recommend starting
with the journaling process?
AURORA WINTER: I would recommend
starting with the journaling
process and really
allowing all-- just to vent
those feelings because I
think unexpressed feelings are
like food poisoning.
And if you keep the
food poison inside
because you want to
stuff it-- because you
know it's going to be a
little bit messy, it's toxic.
So journaling is easy.
It's cheap-- all you need is
a pen and a piece of paper.
And you can really
discover a lot.
I learned so much.
And I-- and I got
so much of my energy
out by writing it down--
and later became the book,
"From Heartbreak to Happiness."
But I never intended
even to reread it myself
when I was writing it.
LISA GARR: Some
people don't know
the scale-- the
level that they're
at in terms of grieving.
And you've basically
put that together
in kind of a grief wheel to
show people kind of to wake
up to where they are on
the grieving scale, right?
AURORA WINTER: Yes.
LISA GARR: It's a great idea.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah,
the grief relief wheel
is a wonderful thing so
that you can see at a glance
where your life is off
balance, and you can
see what you can do about it.
So just like you want a wheel in
your car to be nice and round,
you want your life to
be nice and rounded.
And people who are in grief tend
to-- even more than normal--
go to their strong suits
and ignore their weak suits.
So they can get very lopsided.
And so it just encourages you.
And it's something very simple
that people can do on their own
or they can do with a coach
and help them see what to do--
what specific action to take.
LISA GARR: We're going to take
a look at a video that explains
the grief wheel a little bit.
And then, you can explain a
little bit more after that.
Let's take a look at this.
So what is the Grief Wheel?
Here's what it looks like.
It's just a circle, and it shows
you-- it's a self-rating thing.
You can do this
every day, and you
look at how do you rate
yourself on a scale of 1 to 10
in these various areas?
So let me just talk
you through it.
So there's no wrong or right.
It's just a matter of clarity.
So when you do this
Grief Wheel every day,
you'll rate yourself
on a scale of 1 to 10
on Acceptance and Forgiveness,
on Self-expression,
on Spiritual Connection, on
Support Systems, on Self Care,
on Finance and Legal, on
Career and Profession,
on Family and Parenting,
on Physical Activity,
and on Maintaining
Daily Routine.
It's just a snapshot in time.
So it can change
from day to day.
And also the good thing
is, as you take activities
and you do this every
day for the next 30 days,
you gradually take
small steps to increase
the numbers that are low.
You'll find that your wheel
changes very dramatically.
And your peace, your
productivity, your ability
to deal with the
challenge also changes
and increases dramatically.
Let's look at an example.
This is for a mother
who's got a special needs
child with autism.
She's dealing with
that diagnosis.
This is something new for her,
and this is what her Grief
Wheel might look like.
And again, this is something
she'd do every day for 30 days,
so it would change over time.
Here's what it looks like.
And as you can see if this
was a wheel on your car,
your car would not
be running smoothly.
And the same way when this
is a wheel on your life,
your life is not
running so smoothly.
So let's see how she could use
the Grief Wheel to get her life
in greater balance
and get everything
running much more smoothly.
OK.
So she's given the
self-assessment,
and this again is just
a snapshot in time
how she is doing today.
Tomorrow could be different.
A month from now
will be different
if she does this every day.
So she's given herself an 8 on
Acceptance and Forgiveness, a 3
on Self-expression, a 9 on
Spiritual Connection, a 2
on Support Systems, a 5 on Self
Care, a 7 on Finance and Legal,
a 5 on Career and Profession, a
5 on Family and Parenting, a 9
on physical activity-- she's
a marathon runner so she's
getting a lot of
activity there-- and a 7
on Maintaining a Daily Routine.
OK.
So when she looks at this
Grief Wheel, what stands out?
OK, what stands out, of course,
is the low score of only a 2
on Support Systems and only
a 3 on Self-expression.
So what would plus 2 look like?
We don't want to
look necessarily
at what a 10 in
Support Systems would
be like, but just go
for an easy peasy step
that she can do today.
So to go from a 2 in
Support Systems to a 4
on Support Systems for her
could look like that today,
she'll just make a plan for
what the perfect Support System
scenario might look like.
She might not actually even need
to take any action on it today.
Maybe she'll do that tomorrow.
But today, she could feel
like a 4 in Support Systems
as she gets more clear where
she could hire more support
or ask for more support.
Whatever crisis, heartbreak,
or stress you are dealing with,
this tool will be very
helpful for you to get
your life back in balance.
I promise you, if you use this
every day for the next 30 days,
it will change your life and
increase your sense of peace,
productivity, and clarity.
Great, great tool.
So let's go into
this a little bit.
So this is basically like
taking a self-assessment, like
being your own grief coach--
AURORA WINTER: Like being your
own grief coach-- exactly.
---to see where you're at on the
scale every single day in these
various different segments.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, and
it's nice to give yourself,
you know, thumbs up-- you know,
we're doing 8 on something.
But also just don't try to
stretch from a 2 or 3 to a 10,
but just do something easy
peasy and make it manageable.
And then just check it
every day for 30 days
and just be gentle
with yourself.
Be kind to yourself is very key
when you're dealing with grief.
And yet if you take a little bit
of action every day, gradually
you'll get those lower
numbers much higher.
For example, in the first 100
days of my husband's death,
you know, I was
really shattered--
LISA GARR: Yes.
---using the British
sense of the word.
I was really in deep grief.
And, uh, I finally went to
see a coach or a therapist
because I just
couldn't handle it.
Every night when I fell
asleep, I would again and again
see him dying in front of me.
And I lost 15 pounds.
LISA GARR: It's shocking.
I was haggard.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
Hm mm.
AURORA WINTER: I mean,
post traumatic stress.
LISA GARR: Absolutely.
AURORA WINTER: So they, uh--
my acceptance was not-- was,
you know, 2.
The therapist said-- I said you
have to make these dreams stop.
I cannot deal with
these nightmares.
I just-- I couldn't sleep.
I was haggard.
I was a mom.
I needed to get my act together.
And the coach said to me,
well, tell me a little bit more
about your life.
I'm like, I just want results.
I don't want to cry.
Just make the
dreams stop, please.
[LAUGHTER]
And she said, well,
you know, tell me
a little bit about your life.
What happened?
I said, my husband
died a few months ago.
How are you getting
through the day?
I said, well, I just pretend
he's away on a business trip.
And then I get
through the day OK.
And she's like, so you
get through the day
by pretending that he's
away on a business trip?
I'm like, yeah,
what's it to you?
She's like, well,
maybe the dreams--
maybe the nightmares
aren't the problem.
Maybe they're the solution
because they're calling you
to accept what is the reality.
He's not away on
a business trip.
You know, he's dead.
So that one coaching
session shifted me from a 2
on Acceptance to,
you know, an 8.
So it can happen quite
quickly but just to notice
where you are.
It might be something you need
somebody to coach you through.
Or with the example that
we just had on that video,
it could be as simple
as taking some action
to get more support system.
So small things
that you can do can
really make a big
difference in getting
your life back in balance.
It seems like that these
are steps that you--
that just one by
one, sometimes you
go eight rungs up the ladder.
Sometimes you drop back three.
And it's a process.
But when you have
tangible things
you have to deal
with, for example,
finances and the paperwork
and the details and so
forth of-- yeah, it gets to
be-- I mean, not only are you
dealing with a huge
amount of emotions
but you have all of that stuff.
AURORA WINTER:
This is where it's
so helpful not to do it alone.
I think kindness is key.
And the second thing
people need is connection.
So connection, too, might be
a finance, legal, bookkeeper,
might be a coach,
might be a friend,
might be a spiritual advisor--
whatever is the weak link.
Because it's interesting
that you say that.
I mean, I studied
honors economics.
I come from a family of PhDs.
I wrote and designed
a tax shelter.
But after my husband died,
I could not pay the bills.
I couldn't understand it.
And actually, when you
have a really big trauma,
the dominant side of
your brain can switch.
LISA GARR: Wow.
So I want the-- your audience
to know you're not going crazy.
It's not Alzheimer's.
This is temporary.
But one of the symptoms of
major trauma or deep grief
can be like you feel
like you're stupid.
You're not stupid.
LISA GARR: Interesting.
You're just grieving.
LISA GARR: Hm mm.
Absolutely.
Yes.
Is it common to dive into a
routine or of physicality--
like, I noticed
that you mentioned
you went into working--
I have a friend
who also is dealing with a very,
very rapid loss of her husband.
And she is in the gym
three to four hours a day,
just because it's something
that she can handle.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
-Is that common?
AURORA WINTER: I think
it's common that whatever
is a strong thing for you--
that was working for you
before that you redouble that.
So for me, I was
already writing before.
It was a release for me before.
And I-- it was my
lifeline after he died.
I was already exercising before.
And so I redoubled that.
But where coaching
can come in handy
is that can make your life
even more lopsided sometimes
if you don't also
look at how are
we going to get the bills paid?
LISA GARR: Right.
Simple, practical things.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
And I really invite people,
especially the first three,
four months, be gentle with you.
Whatever you're doing, it's OK.
LISA GARR: Is it OK if you
sit and stare at walls?
[LAUGHTER]
AURORA WINTER: You might
not want to stare at walls.
You know, it's really good to
get outside, in the sunshine,
get some vitamin D, walk,
move, breathe, sleep.
But you know, I drank
after my husband died.
And I've never been a drinker.
It was only one beer a night.
But for me, it seemed
like I'm alcoholic.
But you know, it's
OK-- whatever you need.
But after, say,
maybe six months,
you really need to start
saying yes to life.
And-- and you can
use these processes
as a way to say yes to
life or work with a coach
or whatever it is for you.
Don't stay hanging out
too long in the dark
looking at the wall.
LISA GARR: Well, it's great to
know that there's organizations
like yours that are out there.
Tell me about the
Grief Coach Academy.
What is that?
How did you start it?
How long after your husband
passed did you start that?
AURORA WINTER:
Oh, it was quite--
my husband died a long time
ago now-- 20 years ago.
And I started the Grief
Coach Academy in 2006.
And it's like Oprah
says, sometimes you
choose your career, and
sometimes it chooses you.
And I'm really honored
and privileged to be
a catalyst for changing how
people think about grief
and get through it.
But I was a film and
television executive producer.
And I was quite
happily doing that.
But then "From
Heartbreak to Happiness"
was published and endorsed
by my hero, Dr. Wayne Dyer.
And I thought, OK, that's
my gift to grieving people.
I'm going to go back to
being a film and television
executive producer.
But the book brought
grieving people to me.
And so first, I just, you
know, had coffee with them
and helped them out.
And eventually, I got to
the point where, like, hm,
I'm going to have to, uh,
either turn people away or--
LISA GARR: Take a look at this.
---or start charging because
this is time consuming.
And I was stunned to find
that if I-- when I set it up
as a business and started
charging as a coach, more
people came to me.
Because they wanted to know they
could talk to me every week.
And they-- and they didn't want
to impose on my good nature.
And then my clients
said, wow, you've
helped me more in one
session than my therapist
helped me in two years.
Can you teach me?
I'm like, OK, why not?
So fast forward to today,
we now have a school
devoted to giving coaches the
skills they need to help people
release grief, transcend
grief, and become happy
again much, much more quickly.
And each coaching session
is 30 minutes or less.
LISA GARR: It's such
an incredible story
that you have of how you
turned a tragedy into something
that is so purposeful
and so aligned
with helping other people.
And just as the
woman that you know
that had to suffer the loss
of her child to create MADD,
I mean, there's these different
experiences-- that I look
at people like you and
go, oh my god, I mean,
this is your purpose.
This is your destiny.
AURORA WINTER: Well,
it's really a choice.
I mean, when something
devastating happens,
you can become bitter or you
can decide to become better.
And I really feel now--
I truly feel in my heart
that before I was born--
before I was born,
God asked for a volunteer.
And He said, can I
have a volunteer?
Who'd like to teach
people how to go
from heartbreak to happiness?
I'm like, hey,
pick me-- pick me.
That sounds like a
cool life mission.
And then he asked
for a volunteer
who'd be willing to teach
me what I needed to know.
And my late husband volunteered.
LISA GARR: Wow.
So with that point of view,
there's nothing but gratitude.
LISA GARR: You really
can embrace that.
You really can.
AURORA WINTER: I do.
You do.
I've heard that before, and I
have never really actually seen
somebody fully embrace that.
It's wonderful to talk to
you about this because you
really have embraced that.
That is your path before you got
here, and it's your path now.
AURORA WINTER: I
think there really
must be a reason in suffering.
I mean, initially,
when I was suffering,
I thought God was cruel or
I must be a terrible person
to deserve this suffering.
LISA GARR: Hm mm.
But I now believe that there
must be meaning in that.
You know, my background
is as a screenwriter.
So what is the difference
between a tragedy
and a really great drama?
It's that the hero faces
obstacles in both cases,
but it's what the
hero decides to do.
So I-- I'd love to invite
everybody in the audience,
you know, choose that your
life is a hero's journey.
How can you respond
heroically to whatever
your challenges are?
LISA GARR: That's
beautifully put.
That's beautifully
put, especially
from one with experience.
So what we're going
to do is we're
going to teach a little
bit of the Peace Method.
And we're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back,
Aurora is going
to take us through
the process that she
teaches of grief in 30 minutes.
It is possible.
AURORA WINTER: It is.
We're going to learn a little
bit about it when we come back.
So we're going to
take a quick break.
We'll be back with
Aurora Winter.
I'm Lisa Garr.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
VOICEOVER: What if there was an
online channel where you could
find thousands of videos devoted
to really changing your world?
What if this channel
offered programming that
cared about the things
that mattered most
to you-- your well-being,
your community, and the world
beyond.
Most people really are
thinking the same way every day,
acting the same way, and
feeling the same way,
but really hoping
something will show up
differently in their
life, and it never does.
VOICEOVER: And
what if it was also
dedicated to yoga,
fitness, and alternative
approaches to health.
You don't focus on
what holds you back.
You focus on what's
already there.
VOICEOVER: History
and spirituality.
Ego is the belief that
you are separated from God,
which is the most
terrifying thought
that could ever happen to us.
VOICEOVER: What if it
offered solutions to many
of the problems we face today.
Is it possible that there
is something I don't fully
understand about life--
the understanding of which
would change everything?
VOICEOVER: What if it went
that extra mile to help
you find passion and purpose?
When you're doing what you're
supposed to do, doors open.
VOICEOVER: What if this
channel didn't have any ads
and instead used its
valuable airtime to engage?
FEMALE VOICE: You
will accomplish
so much more if you're happy.
VOICEOVER: Entertained
and enlightened.
We are spiritual beings
immersed in a human experience.
VOICEOVER: With many of the
top thinkers and visionaries
from around the world.
MALE VOICE: We started
this film by asking
what's wrong with the world.
And we ended up discovering
what's right with it.
VOICEOVER: Well, guess what?
It's here.
Inspirational films, original
interviews, engaging series.
Welcome to GaiamTV.
Thousands of streaming videos
to fuel your life's journey.
Welcome back to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr.
And my guest is grief coach
Aurora Winter, author of "Grief
Relief in 30 Minutes."
And there is a method
that Aurora teaches
called the Peace Method.
And this is basically for
anyone who's experiencing
any type of loss, right?
AURORA WINTER: Exactly.
-OK.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, I'm so
excited about this process
because after "From Heartbreak
to Happiness" was published,
people were like, wow, I
really connect to your story,
but how can I get through
this more quickly?
So we have many tools at
the Grief Coach Academy.
But if I had to
pick just one, it
would be the Peace
Method-- the fastest
way to cut through grief
and get to happiness again.
So the Peace Method
is really easy to use.
You can-- I'll explain it here.
And people can do it
as a journaling process
immediately and do it every day.
They'll feel much
better very quickly.
LISA GARR: OK.
So it's-- the P stands for
be in the present moment.
So first, you identify
whatever emotion is going on.
Every emotion is
linked to a thought.
So catch like a-- like
a Sherlock Holmes,
catch the thought that's
linked to that upset feeling.
And then one thought at
a time, you'll take it
through the Peace Method.
So a painful thought
is like a brick.
So it's imprisoning you.
You're imprisoned
in a brick prison.
And if you just try to take the
whole prison wall down at once,
you're just going to
get a sore shoulder.
But if you focus on one brick at
a time and work on the mortar,
you may get it to
loosen or even pop out.
And then you will focus
on another painful thought
and another.
Now, the good news
is-- just like escaping
a prison-- you don't have
to take down every brick.
You just need a big enough
hole to escape into the garden
on the other side.
So the Peace Method is a really
powerful way of focusing on--
and we'll give an example
here of one thought at a time.
So may I explain
what it stands for?
LISA GARR: Yeah, because
I'm thinking-- I mean,
that's the first
thing I was thinking
is that someone's present moment
might be just too painful.
It's amazing when
you do this-- and I've
coached many people through it.
And it usually
takes me 15 minutes.
So 30 minutes is ample time.
So what you want to do is
identify the painful thought.
So in my example, it might be
my husband's death is the worst
thing that ever happened to me.
So the P is come into
the present moment.
The E is express your feelings.
The A is look to accept or even
can you appreciate something?
The C is consider the contrary.
And the E is to find
something that you
can be enthusiastic
about being or doing.
So let's use an example
and walk it through.
LISA GARR: OK.
AURORA WINTER: So
I'm self-coaching--
imagining I was journaling.
So I feel upset and I write,
my husband's death is the worst
thing that ever happened to me.
So P of the peace method.
Take a deep breath
and another one.
And just literally
come into your body--
come into the present moment.
And then ask is that painful
thought-- my husband's death is
the worst thing
that ever happened
to me-- is that about the past,
the present, or the future?
Well, it's about the past.
And we can never
change the past.
We can only forgive,
make amends, let it go,
heal, transcend.
But we can never
change the past.
And if it had been
about the future,
we can never solve all
potential future problems.
LISA GARR: Hm.
We can-- we can deal with the
one problem slash opportunity
that's right here-- right now.
So already that first
step brings clarity.
LISA GARR: What if in
that moment of pain,
you're still-- what is present
is a child who is grieving
or a bill that's not being paid.
So that moment is painful
in that very moment.
AURORA WINTER: That's OK.
Then what you do is you--
rather than pushing away--
I shouldn't be feeling sad.
I shouldn't be feeling pain.
You welcome it and just notice
where it is in your body.
Notice other painful thoughts.
But you need to focus
on one brick at a time.
If you just do a
little bit on all,
it's not going to go right.
So if you have an unpaid bill,
what is the painful thought?
Is the painful thought I
don't have enough time?
Or is the painful thought
I don't have enough money?
Or is the painful
thought my husband
used to take care of the bills?
LISA GARR: Right.
Or he's not here.
-Don't do 49 at once.
See which of those
thoughts is the most
sticky, icky, upsetting--
and then follow that one
all the way through.
And then if you want
to do another one,
follow another one
all the way through.
LISA GARR: Right.
So would you like
me to continue giving
the example around my husband?
Or did you want to
change it to a bill?
LISA GARR: No, no, that's-- I
mean, you answered my question.
Yeah.
AURORA WINTER: All right.
LISA GARR: Because I'm just--
I'm just imagining this
as you're going through it.
AURORA WINTER: But the next
step of the Peace Method
does give you more
opportunity to express
your thoughts and feelings.
So using the example
of my husband's death
is the worst thing that
ever happened to me,
I came into the present moment.
It's about the past.
OK.
The past is not
going to change--
no matter how much I think it
should have been different.
LISA GARR: And I'm here
in this present moment.
Yeah.
So then E allows you to express
your feelings that come up when
you think the thought my
husband's death is the worst
thing that ever happened to me.
So journal-- vent
all of the thoughts--
LISA GARR: Talk about it.
AURORA WINTER: All
of the feelings.
Talk about it.
Get it off your chest.
Maybe take two, three,
five minutes on that step.
And then you'll--
you'll also welcome it.
Maybe it has some
wisdom for you.
I think you know,
like, if you had
a four-year-old--
I know you have
a daughter who's 10 now, right?
LISA GARR: Yeah.
But when-- imagine when she was
four and she skinned her knee.
And she'd come in
running, Mommy, Mommy,
I skinned my knee.
And to her, it's like
the end of the world.
LISA GARR: Right
-Would you go stop crying?
No, you'd say come on my lap.
Tell me about it.
What happened?
LISA GARR: Right.
Yeah.
So that's the energy we want to
have with our painful thoughts.
Tell me about it.
What happened?
When we make war
with our thoughts,
we increase our stress.
And just like a
four-year-old child,
their tantrum will increase.
LISA GARR: Ah, yes.
Because they have some--
LISA GARR: It does drive
the thoughts deeper.
AURORA WINTER: They have
something to tell us.
Just like my nightmares--
LISA GARR: Are
telling you something.
AURORA WINTER: Every
night, you know, seeing him
die again and again and again.
I did not enjoy that.
But it had some gift hidden
in that-- to call me to wake
up to the present moment.
So our painful thoughts have
a gift for us if we can--
LISA GARR: A beautiful
way of looking at it.
AURORA WINTER: --find it.
LISA GARR: Yes, if you
can find the gift in it.
But they're there.
AURORA WINTER: They are there.
And then A for the Peace Method
stands for can you accept it?
So my husband's
death is the worst
thing that ever happened to me.
The acceptance would sound
like, well, that could be so.
LISA GARR: Yes.
Yeah, it is the worst thing
that ever happened to me.
I can allow that.
I can accept that as true.
I don't have to make
war with that idea.
So-- and even just
that is more peaceful.
When we make war with ideas,
it increases our stress.
It-- it prematurely ages
ourselves by up to a decade.
LISA GARR: Wow.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
So--
LISA GARR: Yeah, I
can understand that.
That adds aging to grief.
LISA GARR: As you go through
this process, again and again,
different times of the day or
if it's different days, do you
notice that it gets
easier and easier?
And we're going to continue
to go through the process.
But does--
AURORA WINTER: It gets easier.
It gets faster.
You become friendly with your
own wisdom-- your own guidance.
LISA GARR: Why do we want to
speed up grieving so much?
I'm sure you've been asked this.
AURORA WINTER: Well, who--
I want to speed it up, too.
I'm all about let's get to
the nut of this quickly.
Because you know, people suffer
five to eight years typically.
And it's not their fault
they don't know what to do.
But my experiences with
the Peace Method, people
can get through it sometimes
in one 30-minute session.
Sometimes in a month doing it
on their own-- 30 minutes a day.
But you can get through
it much more quickly.
But it's-- there's
two kinds of pain.
One is sort of the clean pain.
My husband died--
clean the pain.
It's like agony.
I loved him.
He's dead.
But the dirty pain is all
the thoughts that I project.
LISA GARR: Ah.
It was my fault is dirty pain.
I'll always be
alone is dirty pain.
My son won't be OK-- dirty pain.
That's not true.
We don't even know.
Those are all-- so
it's-- like tears
are a shower for the soul.
We don't want to erase
grief in my point of view.
Because I think the clean
part of grief is just-- it's
the front of the hand--
the back of the hand--
grief, love, grief, love.
If you are a person with a
whole heart, you will love
and you will grieve.
LISA GARR: Yes.
But we don't want to have the
dirty pain with the getting
stuck in the well of
grief-- with being
paralyzed and immobilized.
LISA GARR: And projecting all
of your thoughts around it.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, and not
being able to get out of bed
or not being able to love again.
So we want to let
go of those parts.
And then it can even be sweet.
You know, like, when my son gets
married, I will have a moment.
I might even cry.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
Oh, gosh, I wish
my husband was here.
But it will be tears of love.
It will be a beautiful thing.
It won't be tears of anger.
LISA GARR: The tears
that debilitate you.
AURORA WINTER: No.
-Yes.
AURORA WINTER: It'll
be a celebration
that I still love him and
would have loved to have him
be at my son's wedding.
That's a lot of
verbs to conjugate.
LISA GARR: Right.
LISA GARR: Anyway, so go
back to the Peace Methods?
LISA GARR: Yes, yes.
AURORA WINTER: OK,
so you can do-- the A
can either just be to
allow or accept what
is without making a war on it.
Or you can even look,
is there something
you can appreciate-- just like
the front of the hand, back
of the hand.
So I could appreciate my
husband's death as the worst
thing that ever happened to me.
I would only feel that way
if we had had a great love.
So I can appreciate
the time we shared.
I can appreciate the love.
I can appreciate our son.
I already start to feel
better, right-- appreciation.
LISA GARR: Yes.
Then, the next step
of the Peace Method
is to consider the contrary.
So considering the
contrary, what's
the opposite to
my husband's death
was the worst thing that
ever happened to me?
The most obvious it was the best
thing that ever happened to me.
LISA GARR: That's a big step.
AURORA WINTER: That's a big
step but just try it on.
And it's like going shopping.
Like if you and I go shopping
together, and I say, Lisa,
you would look awesome
in that red dress.
You might say red
is not my color.
I'm like, just try it on.
You don't have to buy it.
So you try--
LISA GARR: OK.
You try it on-- just
like you do at the store.
And you can go, holy moly,
you were right, Aurora.
This dress-- I look awesome.
I'm going to buy it.
Or you can go, I tried it on.
It's not me.
All right.
So in the same way, just
try it on playfully.
And--
LISA GARR: Try on the phrase.
Try on the idea of acceptance
of that that's the best
thing that could have happened.
AURORA WINTER: The whole
thing-- just try it
on to discover your own wisdom.
So when I try on
my husband's death
was the best thing that
ever happened to me,
I find deep truth in that.
In some ways, it was.
Through his death, he became
my greatest spiritual teacher.
Through his death, I got clear
on what really matters in life.
And it's not making
a lot of money.
It's not having the big house.
It's people.
It's love.
LISA GARR: Yes, relationships.
It's being of service.
It's making a difference.
And through his death, you
know, fast forward now 20 years,
I'm now a catalyst
for other people
to get through their loss, to
shine their light brightly,
and to make a
difference in the world.
So I can really take that on
and say, yeah, that's true.
LISA GARR: But how long do
you think it should take
someone to get to that place?
[LAUGHTER]
LISA GARR: I mean, you went
through this great process.
And now you're helping
other people with it.
And that's a-- that's a
wonderful thing to do.
But when you coach people, do
say five years-- five months--
or is it different for everyone?
Well, the honest answer
to that is I think
should is about the most violent
word in the English language.
And I catch myself
even to replace
should with could or would.
I think it's very
much a limiting belief
that it's to honor
the person who
died to stay mired in grief.
LISA GARR: Wow.
It's like how long should it
take for a broken arm to heal?
Months, weeks, maybe,
you know, not five years.
So but--
LISA GARR: Not days, either.
-Yeah.
LISA GARR: Right?
But-- but you do
you take action.
You go to the doctor.
You put on the cast.
You da da da da da.
LISA GARR: Right.
People get stuck in grief.
And partly, I think it's--
you know, grief, I think,
is like you're walking along the
park on a beautiful sunny day.
You don't notice, and
you walk into a hole.
LISA GARR: Yes.
And you can stay stuck in
the bottom of that dark hole
forever, but with-- but
with a step-by-step recipe--
if somebody comes
along or if you
use the Peace Method at
home alone, you can go,
hey, I'm not alone.
Here's a road map, and
step-by-step I can walk up.
If you have a grief
coach, you know,
they'll shine a flashlight down
there-- say you're not alone.
I'm here.
A friend can say
you're not alone.
I'm here and have patience.
LISA GARR: Well, and there's
a lot of cultural beliefs also
that go along with
honoring the dead
and taking the time to grieve.
And it can be decades.
I mean, there are
certain cultures--
and I'm sure you've
heard from in the process
of you bringing out your work.
AURORA WINTER: Well, I say
honor your relationship
with the person who died
by making their death be
meaningful not meaningless.
And how you can best make it
meaningful is transcend it
yourself and then do something--
whether it's just to be
a better mother to your own
children because you can get
out of bed-- or whether it's
Mothers Against Drunk Driving
or whether it's starting the
Grief Coach Academy or becoming
a grief coach or like what
you're doing, Lisa, spreading
the word-- helping people--
LISA GARR: Right, right.
Find a way to honor your love
by doing something of meaning.
That's my challenge.
LISA GARR: That makes
a huge amount of sense.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
It gets you unstuck, too.
I mean, you can be a sponsor
to someone who is grieving.
I mean, just like an AA sponsor
is someone who's recovering,
you could-- you
could do anything,
even if it's in a small way.
You could spend those moments
of grieving to go and spend
more time with your children or
something and do something fun.
Yeah.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
I'm thinking of my
friend, and I-- I-- I mean,
there's so many things that
you're talking about that
could so much help her.
AURORA WINTER: Well, I think
Mother Teresa said it right.
We can do no great things.
We can only do small
things with great love.
LISA GARR: That's very true.
And so it-- it is
not a small thing
to call somebody who's
heartbroken and say, hey,
I'm here.
What's going on?
I'll listen.
It's not a small thing to say,
hey, I'm not a grief coach,
but I'll pay for you to get one.
It's not a small thing to just
say, I don't know what to say.
But I could come on over
and babysit the kids
if you'd like to go to the gym.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
Well, let's talk a little
bit about what to say
and what not to say to
someone who is grieving.
Because you've really
written the handbook on this.
[LAUGHTER]
I mean, it-- it's
saying things that people
say just because we've
always heard them.
But they are more harmful
than they are good.
AURORA WINTER: Absolutely.
Let me come to that
in just a second.
And let me just finish
the Peace Method.
LISA GARR: OK.
The last step is the E of the
Peace Method is for enthusiasm.
So what do you
consciously choose?
And so that could be an action.
It could be helping
somebody else.
It could be going to the gym.
It could be eating better.
It could be, like, I consciously
choose that-- you know,
to help other people get
through grief more quickly.
First, I chose to share my story
"From Heartbreak to Happiness"
to help other people
know they're not alone--
that grieving is a process.
Now, as the founder of
the Grief Coach Academy,
give them a tool--
the Peace Method,
which they can work through
their grief in 30 minutes.
But what is it for you
on your painful thought?
So don't just leave it with
exploring your feelings.
Make a decision and take
some action-- no matter
how small-- even if it's
only to write one email
or spend five minutes
checking out something
or go out for a walk or spend
five minutes in the sunshine.
Take some action no matter
how small at the end
of doing the Peace Method.
LISA GARR: That gives
you a little bit of joy.
AURORA WINTER: A
little bit of joy.
LISA GARR: Back and then those
little moments of joy stack up.
AURORA WINTER: Eh.
That's what you
mean by enthusiasm?
AURORA WINTER: They really do.
Yeah, that's what I
mean by enthusiasm.
Well, I chose the
word enthusiasm
because it means, like, "en
theo," to be filled with God.
LISA GARR: Hm.
So what do you
choose to be filled
with God or spirit about?
LISA GARR: Very good.
So it could be that,
as you said, exercise.
It can be sunlight.
It could be a connection.
It could be anything--
looking at the veins
in leaves-- whatever
gives you just
a moment of connection and joy.
AURORA WINTER: A little bit
of joy-- fresh raspberries.
LISA GARR: Fresh
raspberries-- good.
AURORA WINTER: Exactly.
LISA GARR: Good for you.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: So
that's a great way--
that's a great thing
to say, though--
the chips in a
chocolate chip cookie--
little things like that--
AURORA WINTER: Little things.
---is really what it means.
AURORA WINTER: And helping
other people is the fastest
way to get out of yourself.
So if you're feeling really low,
paradoxically getting out there
and helping somebody
who is dealing with even
more challenges can be great.
So the Peace Method,
just those five steps:
come into the present moment,
express your feelings,
accept or appreciate,
consider the contrary,
and end with enthusiasm.
LISA GARR: OK.
And then now, do
you-- the Grief Wheel,
is that a part of
the Peace process?
AURORA WINTER: The
Grief Wheel is actually
a different coaching
process that we teach
at the Grief Coach Academy.
So I teach over a dozen
different coaching processes
that take about 30
minutes each to give
people a step-by-step recipe.
And they can get some videos
with some free coach training
online, as well, at
griefcoachacademy.com.
LISA GARR: Which is great.
And then you also
train coaches, right?
AURORA WINTER: And
I train coaches.
Which is a terrific way for
people to be able to continue
on and to help, as well.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: And I like
the fact that you have
several different tools because
it's not just one tool that's
going to work for everyone.
AURORA WINTER: Exactly.
And there's many different
levels of the processes where
you go in and out, up and down.
So going through
the different tools
is just a way of staying
in action about something.
AURORA WINTER: Staying in
action is so important.
And what I like about the
Peace Method is kind of like
if people want to get
fit, what would be
one class that you'd recommend?
So the Peace Method is
kind of the equivalent of
your favorite power yoga class.
It hits five different
muscle groups.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
---so to speak, but
that doesn't mean that
it's not important to also
eat right and meditate
and do other things.
So we have other processes
at the Grief Coach Academy.
Did you want me to talk
about what to say--
LISA GARR: Yes.
-And what not to say?
LISA GARR: Very,
very helpful, yes.
What-- what would you say to
someone that would be-- well,
let's start with
what not to say.
AURORA WINTER: OK.
Because that is the
most common stuff.
AURORA WINTER: Basically--
LISA GARR: I've said
this before to people.
Yes.
AURORA WINTER: Basically if
it's coming out of your mouth
automatically and everybody else
says it, probably not helpful.
LISA GARR: Such as--
Such as I'm sorry--
not so helpful.
LISA GARR: Not so helpful.
You know why?
Well, I'll tell you
why in a second.
I'm sorry.
It was just God's will.
Be grateful you had him so long.
Um, I--
LISA GARR: You'll
find another husband.
You'll find it or you're young.
You can have another child.
LISA GARR: Yes.
Ooh, yeah.
All of these things
are not so helpful.
Basically anything that tries
to minimize the person's
authentic experience with
some automatic shield comment
is not helpful.
The reason why I'm sorry
is kind of a 50-50 one--
if people who knew my husband
said I'm sorry, that was
fine because they were sorry.
They knew him.
LISA GARR: OK.
But if somebody who never
knew him-- didn't know me
and, you know, asked me
out on a date and said,
you know, how long
have you been divorced?
And I'd say, well,
actually, I'm a widow.
And they're like I'm
sorry, it's disconnecting
because it projects this
whole story about me.
And they don't
even know who I am.
LISA GARR: So it's inauthentic?
AURORA WINTER: It's inauthentic
and it can convey pity.
LISA GARR: Hm.
So my son hated it when people
said I'm sorry because he's,
like, I'm not a victim.
Don't throw your
pity party on me.
So I'm sorry can land like that.
So I think it's better to
if you knew the person,
say, gosh, I really--
I really loved Peter.
And I especially remember this
one time when we went hiking
or he was so kind when my
son was looking for a job.
He did da da da-- like,
tell a little story
about it, that's helpful.
LISA GARR: It is?
It is.
People love to share
those cherished memories.
And try not to project
on the other person.
Let them be wherever they're at.
Grief is not sadness.
Grief, as you know
from reading my book,
it's a whole bunch of
different emotions.
LISA GARR: Yes.
It's anger.
It's fear.
It's denial.
It's a moment of
going I'm alive.
Wow, what a miracle.
LISA GARR: Ah, yes.
Not taking things for
granted, like, huh, life.
LISA GARR: That's true.
Right, right.
When death brushes us
by, we have a wake-up call
that we may not have 40 years.
And so it calls us into,
wow, take a moment.
Just look at-- enjoy the moment.
Look at the sunset.
So--
LISA GARR: And then
you can go back
to denial and anger
and resentment
and fear and all that.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: And then
you can go back
into those moments [INAUDIBLE].
AURORA WINTER: But I
think it's like a slinky.
You go back around-- you come
back around anger or denial.
But you start on the floor,
and you're working your way up.
LISA GARR: OK.
Yeah, so some
good things to say
are-- you'll remember
this because it'll
be your truth if this
is what's coming up--
I don't know what to say.
Fine, because it's authentic.
And then the person
will be-- much better
to have an authentic I
don't know what to say
than an automatic I'm sorry.
My heart goes out to you.
You're not alone.
LISA GARR: Those are acceptable?
-I'm here.
LISA GARR: Those are things
you would want to hear?
AURORA WINTER: Yes.
LISA GARR: Hm mm.
You've got a support
team, and I'm on it.
But really, it's not so much
about what you say as just
being willing to
be a space to hear
whatever's going on for them.
They may want to talk about it.
They may not want
to talk about it.
And that could change
from minute to minute.
LISA GARR: Yeah.
You had said once is it
OK to say to someone that,
um-- that there are resources
available, or is that--
AURORA WINTER: Yeah,
I think you want to--
in that initial conversation
with somebody heartbroken,
your third step would
be around resources.
But first, you want to
acknowledge the situation;
then, listen without fixing;
and then, your third step
is to give hope
and encouragement,
which could be like there
are resources available.
There are grief
coaches available.
You can visit the Grief Coach
Academy-- get some free videos
or free book, you know,
or other experiences like
"From Heartbreak to Happiness."
Initially, I thought that
would be my only gift
to grieving people.
And it's helpful to know,
hey, you know, I suffered.
I was heartbroken,
and I'm happy now.
I could-- I did it.
You can, too.
So encouraging somebody
can show up different ways.
But you first want
to acknowledge
and then listen without fixing.
LISA GARR: Let's talk about
that-- listen without fixing.
I want to go into
that for a second.
Is that active listening?
What is an example of
listen without fixing?
AURORA WINTER: You're
a natural coach here.
LISA GARR: I-- I
want to dive in.
I want to find out.
AURORA WINTER: Well, there
are three levels of listening.
And what we teach at
the Grief Coach Academy
is to listen with that deep
level three of listening.
So most people--
normal population--
they're waiting to talk.
They're not really listening.
LISA GARR: Right, right.
AURORA WINTER:
Level two listening,
you hear what the person
is literally saying.
But level three of listening,
you hear what they're saying.
And you hear also
the hidden messages--
LISA GARR: Underneath.
---underneath, and
you meet them where
their emotional energy is.
So somebody might
say the same thing,
and I would respond
quite differently
depending on what's not
being said-- you know,
the energy around it.
So somebody might
say, oh, I just found
out my mom has got cancer.
It's like, you know, level
two listening-- well,
level one listening is, oh,
well, my friend had cancer,
and she died last week.
Not good.
LISA GARR: Right, right.
Level two listening is, oh,
they have this new cancer
resource available.
That's still not too great.
But level three
listening might be
to hear that she
wants some support,
and say, oh, wow, you
know, tell me about it.
Or would you like to come over
so I can have dinner with you?
Or what was your
relationship like--
good, fair, poor, mixed-- give
her an opportunity to share.
LISA GARR: So go and just
allow the space and be quiet.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, one of
the keys to being a great coach
is to have befriended every
part of your own life.
The reason why most people
aren't good listeners is
because, if I said to you,
I just found out my mom's
got cancer, all the
buttons within you,
you know-- what if
my mom gets cancer?
What if I get cancer?
What if-- you know,
all that comes up.
And it doesn't leave you
available to be a really great
coach to-- I'm not saying
you personally, but you know,
as an example.
LISA GARR: Right, yeah.
And so part of
being a great coach
is to really befriend and
transcend all of your buttons
so that you can be there.
LISA GARR: I think
everyone can use
that advice, Aurora, really.
I mean, it's-- listening is
such an important part of being
a person and to have the first
word out of your mouth always
be "I" is so disconnecting.
I'm very sensitive to that.
And yes, to have-- to even when
you're talking with a friend
about a bad day or if it's
a situation that happened,
oh, I had a situation like
that doesn't serve anyone.
AURORA WINTER: No.
[LAUGHTER]
AURORA WINTER: No, it doesn't.
LISA GARR: Just-- just a little
moment of awareness that I-- I
appreciate you saying that.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah,
and that's what
I love about the Peace Method.
It invites you to listen
to yourself, you know,
because you can
do it by yourself
as a journaling process.
And there's great wisdom there.
LISA GARR: Self-censoring--
a little bit,
yeah, a little bit, yes.
So have you seen people really
transform grief in 30 minutes--
one chunk at a time?
As it is-- I mean, what have
you seen in your experience?
AURORA WINTER: I like to under
promise and over deliver.
But the honest
answer to that is I
have seen people have one
30-minute session with me
and have a life-changing shift.
I'm not guaranteeing that.
It's not every time, but--
LISA GARR: Right.
It-- it-- it has happened
that people have had something
weighing on their heart
for 4 and 1/2 years--
really grieving.
One session--
[SNAPS]
---less than half
an hour, completely
seeing it another way.
And that woman, you
know, said her eyes
were a different color.
She had joy in her
heart that she hadn't
felt for 4 and 1/2 years.
Three months later, I
checked in with her.
She was able to make more
money, be more joyful,
be more present for her
kids, started dating-- like,
her whole life shifted
from one 30-minute session.
I don't guarantee that.
LISA GARR: Right.
But it-- even if--
LISA GARR: Her
life started again.
AURORA WINTER: Her life--
yeah, her life started again.
It's like a booster
cable on a car.
LISA GARR: And I-- I've
always wondered-- I
always ask you about your son.
In his process of
grieving-- and I
know you have a lot of great
advice for parents of children
who are dealing with grief,
as well-- how is your son now?
And how has he coped
with everything, and--
AURORA WINTER: He's so great.
I mean, my biggest worry
was was my son going
to be permanently
damaged from his dad
dying when he was only four?
I mean, that so
weighed on my heart.
And I did everything I
could to try to help him.
But the quick answer
on that is the best
thing parents can do
to help their kids
is get support yourself.
Because once mommy was
fine, my son, you know,
worked through his grief.
LISA GARR: That makes
sense because you're
always going to be a model.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah.
LISA GARR: And how
you relate to it
is how they're going
to relate to it.
AURORA WINTER: Yeah, so--
LISA GARR: Yeah.
AURORA WINTER: It took-- he
grieved when the dog died
four years after Daddy died.
LISA GARR: Ah, OK.
And then, whoa, the tears-- but
it wasn't just about the dog.
It was about his father.
But by then, I was grounded.
He knew I could hold
a space for him.
Kids are so sensitive to
how's mommy and daddy doing.
So--
LISA GARR: Yeah.
Quick answer--
focus on yourself.
That is the biggest
gift for your child.
But my son now is
designing video games.
LISA GARR: Oh, so he's thriving.
He's thriving.
LISA GARR: And you help
so many people thrive.
And I so appreciate what you do.
And to assist you in any
way to get your message out,
I am so grateful to be able
to have the opportunity to do.
AURORA WINTER: Thank you.
Thank you so much, Aurora.
AURORA WINTER: It's an honor
and privilege to be part
of whatever you're doing, Lisa.
You're awesome.
LISA GARR: Well, I got to
say that you are a gift.
AURORA WINTER: Thank you.
Thank you so much--
and to so many people
who heard your
messages and they went
right through to their hearts.
And I can feel
that that happened.
So thank you so
much for watching.
And if you want to watch
a replay of my interview
with Aurora Winter or
share it with your friends,
you can go to gaiamtv.com
for a lot more
thought-provoking interviews and
inspirational films and much,
much more.
You can sign up for a free trial
at gaiamtv.com today, as well.
And thank you so much, again,
for everything that you did
and for being here and talking
to us about the Peace Method
and "Grief Relief
in 30 Minutes."
and your website for
people to go to is--
AURORA WINTER: It's
griefcoachacademy.com.
They can actually get a free
copy of the softcover book.
I'm giving the first 500
copies away for free.
So they can get that at
griefcoachacademy.com.
LISA GARR: Always a giver.
[LAUGHTER]
Thank you, again.
And thank you so
much for watching.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[THEME MUSIC]